four eight nine eight now history on
book TV looks at US operations in North
Vietnam during the Vietnam War the
secret war against Hanoi relies on
recently Declassified top-secret
pentagon documents and over sixty
interviews with key officers author
Richard Schultz is an expert in the
Pentagon studies an observation group
which oversaw the activities in
Southeast Asia from 1964 to 1972 he was
at Fort McNair in Washington DC for this
70 minute discussion
good evening ladies and gentlemen and
welcome to this the first event in our
1999-2000 series of lectures by authors
of new books in the field of strategy
and defense policy I'm Bob Solano
director of publications and editor of
joint force quarterly here at ndu this
series is presented by the Institute for
national strategic studies with the kind
support of NGO Foundation and is
intended to expose faculty staff and
students as well as colleagues and
friends from about town to the
background of works of interest to
devote a Strategic Studies defense
analysis and military affairs in the
words of the author's themselves I'm
very pleased tonight to introduce this
program for three reasons one it marks
the real alteration of this lecture
series which after a lapse of almost a
year and the subject of this book had
hand is something which has interested
me since my involvement in Vietnam in
the 1970s and earlier at Fort Bragg and
the identity of the author himself who
is an old friend and colleague the
subject of special operations in Vietnam
has received scant attention literature
on the war other than well chronicled
exploits of the 5th Special Forces Group
among the Martin yards or c'mere chrome
along the Cambodian border accounts of
the unsuccessful raid to rescue American
POWs at Sante in North Vietnam and some
efforts to analyze the effectiveness of
black gray and white propaganda aimed at
the Vietcong and regular North
Vietnamese forces there are really few
if any references to the subject of this
studies and observation group of the US
military assistance command or max SOG
in the literature on Vietnam the secret
war against Hanoi therefore is an
important contribution to the history
not only the Vietnam War but also to the
theory and application of those
instruments of national power which we
group under the rubric of special
operations it is a book that could not
have been written without the
cooperation of many former members of
Max SOG their current day successes at
US Army Special Operations Command at
Fort Bragg and the unique qualifications
of its author Richard H Schultz his
director of the International Security
Studies Program
an associate professor of international
politics at the Fletcher School of Law
and Diplomacy he's also taught here at
in Washington at Catholic University
held visiting academic appointments at
both the Naval War College and the US
Military Academy he's received grants
research fellowships from Mohammed
Stanford and the u.s. Institute of Peace
dick is written and lectured widely on
terrorism intelligence revolutionary
warfare and allied subjects but with the
topic of his doctoral dissertation on US
counterinsurgency strategy in Vietnam
that drew us together in 1982 when we
were colleagues at the national strategy
information center it was then we began
many conversations on SIOP pole war and
Special Operations and it's delight for
me to welcome dick back tonight to talk
about the successes and failures of Mex
aughh and in part what those tell us
about the use of Special Operations
today
well it's um it's really a delight to be
here I want to first thank Bob Solano
for inviting me and also say that
commend him actually for the wonderful
work he's doing with Joint Forces
quarterly and with the publication
series here at ndu it's its first class
and a good job
am i all so it's wonderful to see um
some friends and I see several friends
here I see some of my former students
and it's really a special night also for
me because I have my my dear sweet niece
here so it it's great to be here what I
want to do is first say something about
what why I think the book is unique all
authors like to do this you know we
write books and we tell you they're
unique I think that what is unique about
this book and it would have been unique
whoever wrote it is that it allows us to
look into a secret world it's a fact
that since OSS in world war ii to the
present the US government has attempted
to use special operations and covert
operations to support foreign policy but
but much of that is secret and it should
be it took place within the context of
the Cold War but when the Cold War ended
there's an opportunity to start to open
up those vaults and to take a look at
the successes and failures and to
determine what is that we can learn from
those successes and failures and I think
there are things to learn from it now
try to address that later on I was lucky
I I found a three-star general Terry
Scott who is the head of Special
Operations Command and we spent a long
time talking about the need to do such a
study and one of the things that that
stimulated him to support it was the
fact that that he felt his own command
and no
much about what saag had had
accomplished and over a significant
period of time so my book is about the
studies and observation group an oculus
name sounds like a bunch of academics
doing studies but in fact saw as it was
called I believe is the largest covert
paramilitary operation conducted by the
US and the Cold War if you measure that
by the complexities and the operations
involved the time they ran it not
spending money and that would be
Afghanistan but but one of these other
indicators now the story of SOG let me
set if you will a bit the context and
and the context for SOG really predates
saw get lies with the Kennedy
administration and the story begins and
I wrote this as a story not not as a an
academic speak or policy wonks speak but
but as a story I had great characters to
to build that story around but the way
young SOG came about was in 1961 the
origins of it why in Kennedy's first
National Security Council meeting
you know Eisenhower had told him keep
your eye on Laos and he came in and and
in his first briefing told him he needed
to keep his eye on Vietnam the briefing
was conducted by general ed Lansdale an
Lansdale who had just been back from
Vietnam told Kennedy that things aren't
going well
the Vietcong they're closing in and the
North Vietnamese are are providing a lot
of support for them Kennedy at one point
in the meeting turned to Allen Dulles
who was the head of the CIA and he said
are we doing the same stuff to them up
north we have guerrillas operating in
the north and and Dulles gave them a
very unsatisfactory answer and and
Kennedy said well I want guerrilla
operate up north and really that's the
beginning of this large covert operation
Kennedy became disillusioned with the
CIA felt they weren't moving fast enough
and at the end of 62 he decided to turn
it over to the military and and so
that's the story that I'll talk a bit
about tonight the turning it over to the
military and and how that operation was
developed and right um I should say
something more about the evidence the
evidence for this book is based on
documents that probably were never
supposed to see the light of day they
were highly classified very pretty deep
and I was fortunate enough to to
convince general Scott to open that
archive to me but also general Scott did
something else that was quite helpful um
he he gave me an introduction to the men
who ran SOG to the people who ran the
different operational components of SOG
and so I had probably between three and
four thousand pages of documents and and
I interviewed 60 of the people who ran
each of SOGs four operational divisions
and the way to understand SOG and then
the way I approached it was from an
operational point of view I wanted to
know what is that they were trying to do
and why what is it they were trying to
do they had four operational components
the first dealt with the insertion and
running of agents and then later the
creation of a complex deception or
double triple cross operation that
included some pretty rough stuff such as
manipulating
North Vietnamese POWs the second
division of SOG dealt with psychological
warfare and that included trying to
establish a fact fabricated resistance
organization in North Vietnam kidnapping
and indoctrinating North Vietnamese
citizens operating falsely attributed
black radio stations distributing
propaganda material forging letters and
documents sometimes called blackmail and
initiating a some other dirty tricks and
dirty tricks was part of it the third
operational division of SOG dealt with
covert maritime operations against the
North Vietnamese Coast
this included capture and destruction of
North Vietnamese naval fishing boats and
also crossed beach commando sabotage
raids and the insertion of PSYWAR
material and then finally the fourth
operational division of SOG focused on
the Ho Chi Minh Trail
cross-border operations against the
trail to disrupt the movement of North
Vietnamese supplies and troops by
identifying targets and calling in
airstrikes so these are the four
operational divisions of SOG and these
four operational divisions focused on
two of what Klaus would call centers of
gravity I would call them strategic
pressure points and and what do I mean
by a strategic pressure point it's it's
one of those aspects of the enemy that
if you affect it and you throw them off
balance you you make it more difficult
for them to accomplish their objectives
and SOG focused on two one was the rear
area of North Vietnam and what they
wanted to do plain and simple
was make the North Vietnamese believe
that they had a real internal
security problem they had a subversion
problem and and they needed to devote
resources to deal with that and and and
and of course as all of you know in
wartime if your rear area is uncertain
it creates a lot of tension and problems
for you affect it and you can affect
your enemy's capacity to conduct war
doesn't mean you'll win the war them but
you can throw them off balance and and
saw game did that and then secondly saw
gained at the Ho Chi Minh Trail the Ho
Chi Minh Trail strategically important
to the North Vietnamese in fact in the
book my recount how in the early 90s
people started the Americans started to
travel back to Vietnam to talk to the
Vietnamese and to do business or
whatever and one such person was a
fellow from Minnesota who was a peace
activist and he he met up with this
North Vietnamese Colonel not an ordinary
colonel the fellow who was given the
honor of taking the surrender at in 1975
in South Vietnam and and this activist
said to the colonel you know was there
anything we could have done to prevent
your victory sure that the answer was no
and the colonel looked them in the eye
and said cut the Ho Chi Minh Trail and
then elaborated on it so focusing on the
trail was a strategic pressure point and
and and so SOG to understand SOG we need
to understand it in terms of what it at
empted to do now what I'd like to do is
to talk about some of the the key
revelations some of the things that that
I I found out in my research and and to
highlight those and and I would begin
with the fact that it's it's so
interesting that the Kennedy from the
very early days of his administration
embraced the use of covert action to
subvert Hanoi and convinced it to stop
fomenting war in the south and he stayed
with that idea on may I am IANA how he
came to it but it made strategic sense
and and Kennedy believed that all right
if if they're doing this in the south we
need to throw them off balance by doing
it to them in the north and and and
Kennedy some of Kennedy senior advisors
signed up for this too when you won't be
surprised to hear that McGeorge Bundy
did and that Walt Rostow Trost out did
and uh and Bobby Kennedy but slated
McNamara and McNamara actually was
Kennedy's action officer for taking the
covert war away from the CIA and getting
the Pentagon to step up to it and and
it's in the documents I mean it's clear
in the documents that he did this in
fact in 1963 this was the period of the
transfer in the Pentagon the Chairman
had Joint Chiefs of Staff at the time
Maxwell Taylor kept trying to pass it
back to the CIA and and and McNamara
would cut him off and and say no this is
you're going to do it and this is going
to be in the hands of the military the
Kennedy administration quickly became
disenchanted by the way with the CIA's
capacity to run larger covert operations
they gave it to the CIA and and then
Kennedy kept after him and and he
concluded in 1962 towards the end of 62
that the CIA couldn't wouldn't do it
they just wouldn't do it Colby who I
interviewed extensively just didn't
believe that these sorts of things could
affect North Vietnam and and he threw in
a towel and and so Kennedy decided in 62
to take it away from the CIA
and give it to the military then it's
and what's very interesting is that that
many think God knows is this kind of
lore that Kennedy burned by the Bay of
Pigs learned his lesson it's not true at
all
it's not true at all the Bay of Pigs in
no way slowed him down in terms of his
enthusiasm for for covert operations and
and and not just in North Vietnam
against North Vietnam but of course
against Cuba itself and what we know now
about the two Kennedy's and Cuba makes
clear that on Cuba he didn't back off
Bay of Pigs and didn't affect him and
it's certainly the case in in against
North Vietnam that in no way did he he
back off on pushing for the covert war
I'm he believed in this for reasons that
that aren't always clear he believed in
it now the Kennedy White House
interestingly believed that the Pentagon
was was up to the task that since
special forces were being built up they
remember Special Forces had two missions
and one one was unconventional warfare
as it was called which meant these kinds
of subversive operations on Kennedy
believed that the Pentagon was up to the
task that the military was building up
Special Forces and they had the skills
necessary to intensify and run covert
operations against North Vietnam the
fact is that it wasn't quite that simple
in certain areas it's the military was
ready but in a number of more esoteric
areas that included PSYWAR and running
agents and deception operations they
were not and and so there was some
flawed reasoning and reasoning on the
part of the Kennedy administration
thinking that that this could happen
quickly overnight
now while while eager to use covert
action these Washington policymakers
evidence little understanding of the
intricacies involved in doing so that's
not a new story for some of the people
in this audience but but in fact it was
the case here that they believed that
you could get this started quickly you
know there were all these special forces
that were being built up give it to them
get started and put hanaway on the ropes
and and of course they were wrong about
that not so easy to do these things
takes time but but also for SOG it ain't
it took learning and they had to learn
on the job they didn't have the
expertise in esoteric areas and it was
costly in some some aspects of it that
I'll mention in a little bit the senior
leadership of the Kennedy administration
charged the Pentagon with the task of
intensifying the covert war inside North
Vietnam but it's not something that the
Pentagon wanted to step up to I mean
it's very interesting how and and I can
elaborate on this if someone's
interested how the the mainstream box
Deadland adds Lansdale out of the
picture he was the one who became
special special advisor to Secretary of
Defense and Special Operations and how
the Pentagon created something that
looked like it was supposed to be the
advocate for special operations but
turned out to be just the opposite this
was called the Saxa the office of a
special assistant for counterinsurgency
and special Activities special
activities would be SOG so the Pentagon
and I'll say more about this resistant
now what's very interesting is the
difference between Kennedy and Johnson
and you see it in the title in the in
the in the book I refer to it as Ken
the eagerness and Johnson trepidation
and Johnson when in nineteen it took a
year to write the operational plan for
SOG and in part of had to do with with
foot dragging on the part of the
mainstream in the Pentagon that didn't
want the military to take this over so
it takes a year to write this plan but
but by November they had it done and the
plan if you look at it it had all the
tricks in the bag it was it was an
enthusiastic set of operations that were
proposed and it was given to Johnson &
Johnson initially Johnson thought well
if Kennedy can do it I can do it too he
wasn't going to be any less tough than
Kennedy but the closer he looked at that
operational plan and started to think
about the 1964 election he he backed off
and and so what he did was he set up a
committee interagency committee headed
by brute crew lack who was his special
assistant and he gave cruel act marching
orders he said I want you to take and
pick only those operations that have
least risk and what they did was
literally cut the plan in half and they
took the least risk approach and and
they also started to to concentrate on
on constraints on constraints and one of
the the most interesting stories about
SOG is the way it was micro managed
every operation had to be cleared
through a chain of command that ran into
the White House and and and that
oversight process was one that that set
a frame of reference and and that frame
of reference was avoid risk limit
operations and and and in fact by
Johnson by setting this
in nineteen at the end of 63 and making
that decision to limit the SOG what it
did wasn't played right into the hands
of the bureaucracy that that didn't like
this idea the State Department didn't
like it the the Pentagon didn't like it
and the CIA didn't like it because Laos
was their war and so what what what
happens is that early decision by
Johnson sets the framework for SOG that
makes it very difficult for them to be
bold to propose bold and innovative
measures because they had to go through
the authorization process and that and
the bold and the the risky often not
always but often got washed out so in in
in a very real sense the the oversight
process in the interagency process was
more concerned with the trouble that SOG
operations could get you in if we
revealed rather than the problems that
could cause Hanoi if you exercise them
with vigor I mean it's an interesting
contrast now SOGs record against Hanoi
was mixed it had it had its share of
successes although it didn't have a very
good way of determining and measuring
success which was one of its real
weaknesses but but SOG accomplishments
were there and and I believe and I argue
in the book that those accomplishments
could have been greater had its
operations not the limb not been limited
and restrained by jittery Washington
Washington policymakers who as I just
said became more concerned with the
trouble covert operations could cause if
exposed rather than the problems such
activities could cause annoy if executed
effectively now SOG had some spectacular
blunders too
and probably the most famous being the
complete failure of its agent operations
between 1964 and 1967 actually it just
continued a failure that CIA had with
putting agents into North Vietnam about
500 were put in North Vietnam and by
1967 it was apparent that this thing was
a complete double-cross and actually the
person who who figured that out pretty
quickly in 1967 and I was hoping would
be here today but it was General Bob
Kingston who then was Lieutenant Colonel
Bob Kingston and he took over the
ancient operations and when he looked at
it in sort of typical if you know
Kingston and typical Kingston style
he walked into Jack's Singh lab who was
the chief of SOG at that time and he
said he said sir do you have any
messages you want to send to Ho Chi Minh
because I have a direct channel to it
and and of course Singh lob went through
the roof but then they set their minds
to well well is it possible to run this
back against the North Vietnamese and
and what came out of that was one of the
most interesting deception operations
that I've ever encountered
with what SOG attempted to do was they
found by the way it was interesting that
that Hanoi seemed to think there were a
lot more agents in North Vietnam than
there really were or hadn't sent maybe
two times as many actually I talked to
some some people who some North
Vietnamese who who thought that it was
four times as many and so what what this
led Singh WOB and Kingston to cook up
was the idea that well if they think
there were more maybe we can make them
think they're even more than they think
there are
and they created this deception program
that I would characterize as fiendishly
nasty but it had North Vietnamese
attention and and and I explained in the
book how it had North Vietnamese
attention and I can discuss that in the
Q&A now Assad operations you know they
were shadowy operations deception all
that but it was still war and in in in
several ways SOG played real hardball
they played real hard ball and they
ruthlessly manipulated North Vietnamese
prisoners of war as well as North
Vietnamese citizens that saw teams
kidnapped the indoctrinate and they
indoctrinated them they had some
psychological warfare dirty tricks that
were I would characterize as mean stuff
and then of course when the Ho Chi Minh
Trail they they gave the North
Vietnamese a lot of problems in the in
the period 66 to 68 69 things started to
change for them Hanoi by the way did not
take SOG lightly it mounted a major
counterintelligence effort inside its
borders to track down agents and spies
all available means of communication
were used to warn the population of
spies in their myths furthermore Hanoi
enacted tough new decrees with harsher
penalties including execution for anyone
who got involved in
counter-revolutionary activity it
strengthened his coastal defenses to
deal with SOG and on the Ho Chi Minh
Trail it took several steps to
neutralize saw reconnaissance teams
now finally young and despite both
Washington imposed restraints and Hanoi
countermeasures SOG had an impact and
what's very interesting is that in 1968
after after the Tet Offensive when
Johnson started to to try to negotiate
with the North Vietnamese the North
Vietnamese had two demands for starting
the peace for starting the peace talks
and those demands were always reported
as turned off the bombing and stopped
other military operations against North
Vietnam what the SOG documents show and
get much more specific one is the fact
that the North Vietnamese actually said
stop the side war stop the agents stop
the operation the covert operations and
and that was the very interesting thing
to find in in these documents so SOG was
a long time ago
and and the question that I want to
address I have a few more minutes Bob
the question I want to address is are
there things we can learn from SOG from
the SOG experience for the future and
and I think there is a great deal to
learn from Mack V SOG about the capacity
of the US government to execute large
and more complex covert operations the
SOG experienced a number of obstacles
and and complications that limited its
effectiveness playing by Hanoi schools
proved harder to do than anticipated but
I would propose that the obstructions
that plagued SOGs efforts are not an
aberration unique to the Vietnam case
but just the opposite they can be found
in other Cold War examples where the
u.s. sought to employ covert action and
furthermore these limitations are likely
to affect the capacity to the White
House to use this instrument of
statecraft in the future
an evaluation of the post-world War two
history of American covert operations
I think reveals and would reveal if we
could do even more case studies the
following recurring barriers to
effective use of this instrument one
while being drawn to the use of covert
action in the hope that it will quickly
resolve difficult foreign policy
problems presidents have generally shown
little understanding of what covert
action can and cannot accomplish and
have been very impatient with it and and
that was true of SOG and that's been
true lots of other cases second
presidents have also worried about
employing clandestine methods fearing
the potential political fallout if the
operations were exposed there's a kind
of it'sif Renia here on the one hand
Richard Helms who I interviewed I said
to him I was talking about the Kennedys
and then he said not just them is that
all of these presidents would come to me
or their advisers and say you know I
want to do this covertly and so we go
write a plan and then we'd show up to
them and they'd look at the plan and
they go you want to do what and and and
that's some that's an interesting thing
that I found in spades in the in the SOG
case that there there there questions
about about how far to go and the part
of presidents and their advisors they're
also important moral dilemmas here
I mean look some of the things that saw
did these were really tough hardball
measures and they raised a lot of
questions in the bureaucracy specific
I'll give it a specific cases in the Q &
A of where SOG wanted to do something
and the State Department throws up its
hands no no no this is this is morally
and ethically wrong and so that's the
big issue that we have to struggle with
because there may be cases where not a
general principle general
reasoning but but specific cases where
you you sometimes have to do tough
things the third general lesson the
effective use of covert action as an
instrument of policy proved to be a
persistent challenge presidents and
their advisors were inept at
coordinating and integrating covert
action into larger strategies I didn't
say much about that tonight but in the
book I go into it in great detail about
how SOG at the campaign level at the
operational level I think eventually did
okay but but the integration of SOG into
a larger strategic a larger strategy was
not there SOG was looked at as in
ciliary not complementary and and and I
would propose that not much has changed
through the Cold War on that fourth
organizing and manipulating and managing
complex covert programs has also been
hard for the United States because in
because it involves integrating a
variety of different covert tactics and
in the case of SOG that was an
interesting thing
it was very compartmented so getting the
compartments together and cordon every
coordinating everything and then come
easily
when they got to it by 68 but it took
four years so this is an enduring
problem fifth when more than one
government agency is involved in covert
operations the organizational and
managerial challenges multiply and the
CIA military interaction in SOG is
hardly one that we would characterize as
close cooperation six employing
different covert action techniques
especially against hard targets as
presented the the United States with
persistent operational level challenges
and sometimes were
was too easy to give up on that and and
there was some evidence that the SOG
experienced as well so I think that many
of the revelations about SOG that I I
talked about it was illustrate these
points and when we contrast SOG with
other covert actions we know about we
see some of the same constraints that
hindered SOG these impediments appear
endemic to the use of covert action by
the United States now the final question
that I would raise is should we care I
mean the Cold War is over we're in a new
scent we're entering a new century
indeed a a new millennium and and and do
we need covert operations and do we need
the kinds of measures that SOG carried
out the story of SOG reveals that an
array of covert measures were readily
available although constraint is the
post-cold war world creating situations
in which these methods may need to
counter new threats and I think we need
to have a discussion and debate about
that I mean put differently can we
identify both state and non-state actors
who richly deserve to be the recipients
of the different kinds of covert special
operations that saw directed against
Hanoi now that's an extreme statement
but we do need I think to take a look at
the kinds of asymmetrical threats that
the u.s. will face in the future
especially in the non-state actor realm
and then start to think about well what
were the kinds of techniques that SOG
used how does technology how does
information warfare
and and and other developments allow us
to use this instrument and and should we
use it are there cases where we should
use it we need to have a debate about
that in the discussion about that not
just tonight but in the policy arena so
with that why don't I stop just a couple
of ground rules for our Q&A unlike many
of the discussions and the hallowed
halls of ndu this one is on the record
the working press is here which brings
me to my second point you will find a
CNN sony sharper with a device
effectively known as a shotgun or
microphone if you do have a question
please raise your hand and give them a
chance to to get the microphone to you
and identify yourself and your
affiliation we appreciate it and try to
keep your questions as brief as possible
we have about half an hour Colonel
Collins if you were God what would you
recommend to improve the prospects for
covered operations in the United States
well I think that the thing that I would
recommend is that that John we really
need to to have a good debate and
discussion and and lay out why these
techniques may well be necessary
we're in policy community we need that
discussion and and we need to infuse in
that discussion that while on the one
hand we are democracy and we have a set
of values that we adhere to but it does
not mean that we should completely
hamstring ourself especially against
some of the asymmetrical and non-state
actor threats that we face and and and I
fortunately we don't we just don't have
those sorts of discussions it it ends up
as soon as you start to talk about some
of the things that SOG do
it's a gas and oh my goodness and even I
mean on this book when I look at that
some of the stories that are being
written about it now in the media I mean
they go to you know the things that were
tough and and mean and that's what they
accentuate um I wrote this book not
simply to tell the story of of saag and
the tough measures that are used but to
raise questions and I try to raise them
in the in the epilogue about how these
endemic limitations and I use the word
endemic and I mean endemic have have
constrained our use of this instrument
and we have to think about using this
instrument in against some of these more
asymmetrical threats so that that that I
I think a democracy sometimes has to
have some teeth now it doesn't mean that
we should willy-nilly do this but but
there has to be somewhere in between and
we just don't seem to be able to get
there please
lieutenant Carl Meyer I guess student
your presentation seemed to to use the
same kind of argument that we hear so
many times which is that then a military
instrument could have been successful in
Vietnam which is not necessarily a true
statement whether it was a special
operations instrument or whatever the
other instruments that we is how how do
you look how does the Special Operations
community look forward and look at the
the kind of threats that we face and
look at the kind of situations that
we're going into and say well it's not
necessarily the case that a military
instrument is that the kind of
instrument that we need to use how is
the Special Operations community going
to react to that let me let me address
this in the SOG case you know I have a
half hour here to talk so I can't hit on
some of the themes that I'd like to but
very interest in the book I tried to
make it absolutely clear that SOG wasn't
going to win the war and and and the two
centers of gravity or strategic pressure
points the SOG focus on that wasn't the
beginning in the end of the the enemy's
strategic pressure points those were
just two but they were an interesting
two and and and focusing on them I
believe started to throw North Vietnam a
bit off balance now that has to be
thought about within the context of you
know a much more integrated political
military economic strategy and I
discussed that in the book I don't go
into great lengths about what that
should look like because I wasn't the
subject but but there's no question that
that Special Operations has to be part
of a larger strategy now I I do
introduce that theme by going back to
general Wild Bill Donovan of the Wild
Bill Donovan ran something like SOG in
World War two is called OSS but Bill
Donovan sat down a bedrock principle and
he said that
OSS operations had to be integrated with
support and be part of the larger effort
and that's the way we have to think
about SOG and that's the way we have to
think about special operations in the
context of today's world um it's not a
cure-all for everything and and I would
never propose that it is or could be
however it does do some things that
might be useful as part of a sort of a
larger approach to let's say dealing
with Iraq or dealing with Osama bin
Laden or we could think of some other
possibilities but but you you think
about it within I always think about it
within a Donavan framework and I apply
it not just the wartime but peacetime
yes talk about how Colby and the CIA
were aware that these teams were not
working and tried to convince DoD and
other powers would be that that was the
case but as you know there was much to
comment on this sort of scrums II there
were 26 teams with CIA sinan a 16 of
them went in between April and December
of 1963 which is precisely at the time
when Colby's Far East even supposedly is
telling everybody that they're done
working secondly of those 16 teams um
well why did Colby do it I mean it's a
good question given that he didn't
believe in it
it's a my answer would be this that
while Colby didn't believe in it
there was a lot of pressure on CIA to to
to deliver and so they put teams in
maybe it was cynical but they did it
there also in some of the documents in
daily especially I don't know if you
read that you got the 500 page history
of thug but in there what you see is
that that while CIA didn't believe in it
there there was there some evidence and
I didn't go too far with this because I
just had some shreds that they they they
they didn't want to give it up to the
military even though they didn't believe
in it and and in fact of course they
chafed at the idea that the military
would take over a covert operation and
they would work for the military which
Kennedy had set down and in that in
National Security action memorandum 57
so it's a I don't know if my answer is
satisfactory but but that's how I see
why you you had CIA continued to put
those teams in even though Colby said
and I imagine you talked to him about
this and and others have said that they
just didn't believe that you could
affect denied areas over what had been a
four year program no I think I think
yeah I think there's something to
they're just trying to put them in to
show DoD up um could be but he didn't
believe in that it was gonna have any
effect yeah well he it's it's that's I
tried to Chronicle with this in the book
but it's it's the view of denied areas
that you can see that he was willing
anyway to concede denied areas I've just
I've I'm with the defense of prisoner of
war missing-in-action office I first
learned about these operations in 1982
when commando came out with the story
that we had to investigate and at that
time I got access to a fairly large
about to file drawers full of material
up in j5
in my memory of some of those documents
is that they explained why CIA continued
those operations despite their
misgivings they did so explicitly under
duress is not the right word well they
did so against their better judgment and
with the understanding that at the end
of this next cycle of insertions if
there was no better results than in the
earlier phase that they would refuse to
continue it and no deal and I've
discussed this before unfortunately when
I went back for those documents a couple
of years later on another research
matter
I couldn't get access to them again and
I've never been able to find them since
so take what I've said for what it's
worth no III think that one of the
things what we have to recognize is the
extent to which this covert operation
was important to the White House and and
I can't stress that enough that the
White House wanted this done and the
fact that that the CIA wasn't moving
fast enough is in the documents I have
and their dissatisfaction with this is
there and and in fact you know when they
decide to take it away from the CIA and
give it to the military and and then
resistance comes from the mainstream its
McNamara who is the action officer for
pushing the Pentagon to take this over
now it's interesting because in the
Pentagon what the Pentagon did was they
created the Saxa and as I mentioned with
the exhibit with the the purpose of
keeping things like covert operations on
a short leash and under tight control
but they presented it to to the
administration
as we're getting on board for this so it
was interesting to see how that that
unfolded but when when Maxwell Taylor
tried to pass the the operation back to
CIN suggested that it should go back to
CIA McNamara cut it off so you can see
McNamara's involvement in this McNamara
when I interviewed him he said I don't
remember any of that so I you know I
read him some documents and he said he
said well you know I I didn't believe in
any of it but I did it I all I know is
that in the documents he comes across as
being he doesn't come across as being a
potted plant on this question I haven't
read your book so I'm probably missing
something but from your presentation I
get the impression that this was an
organization that was more interesting
than significant so assuming I'm wrong
you convinced me otherwise using this
very specific and explicit terms to show
me the strategic and operational impact
of this organ no no but it's what North
Vietnam was doing internally the
measures that they were taking to
counter what they perceived to be a
growing subversion problem and and I've
got that in the book and that includes
internal party discussions it includes
what they were communicating to their
population and the kind of training that
they were giving to local security cadre
I mean so those are the and the Ho Chi
Minh Trail there they went to great
lengths to counter the reconnaissance
operations and that included both active
and passive defense measures what I
would propose is that that SOG by 1968
was beginning to have the effect the
Kennedy desired in 60
one but they had just gotten to that
point now why did they just get to that
point for some of the things I said or
earlier that they you know they they had
to learn on the job I mean first of all
you know they were when the when saw
stood up it was there was no
organization in being they had to create
this from the ground up while the White
House was saying give me the results
give me the results so it took a while
for them to figure it out and and to
gain some expertise and some areas they
didn't have but but my view would be
that 68 they they they started to cross
that threshold and it was just at that
point that at least against North
Vietnam Johnson shut it down now most of
it now against the Ho Chi Minh Trail
what the story really is one of early
success because they caught the North
Vietnamese off-guard
the North Vietnamese taking the measures
necessary to to counter that and then
saw being able to you know it's it's
it's point/counterpoint saw then being
able unable to diversify and change what
they wanted to do in part because of the
kinds of constraints that were placed on
where they could go and what they could
do and and so on so I mean I don't want
to give the impression that that saw had
strategic impact what I'm saying is that
SOG could have affected and was
beginning to have an effect on these two
centers of gravity so I want to be very
precise when that point night and in the
book I'm probably at nauseam precise on
that point
yes what is your understanding of a
relationship we decide and even the
white operation which is the
technological effort based in
accompaniment so on to open up the trail
get information about the travelers took
a long time to develop yeah which kind
of relates to their ability to be
effective they of course they they were
a consumer but but they also in you know
in putting the sensors and stuff and
they actually hump some of that stuff in
and and put it in place now the extent
to which that contributed to their
targeting was not in at least in the
documents it isn't clear to me that that
the take from that was then integrated
into the the targeting that saw
conducted in fact a lot of times saw
teams were put into an area to to see
what they could see and the idea was
originally that they would stay out
there five or six days be quiet
you know hang out and and and and and
look for targets now what happens is
that that becomes increasingly difficult
to do staying for example staying for
five or six days in 1969 not likely but
it's it's unclear to me the extent to
which the take from that that data was
fed into saw I know that it was fed into
the bombing but the bombing the the kind
of bombing that SOG generated was
tactical air strikes not that heavy
heavy bombing
that the b-52s carried out I mean I
think I'm right on that but but Scotty
maybe you can tell me if I'm missing
something here yes the future when stock
was going in we were only less than 20
years away from World War two give or
take a few years and the policy wonks
that you referred to had had experience
both in combat and certainly in seeing
movies of Donovan's exploits with OSS
santomero and a variety of others
greatly glorified guerilla operations in
Special Operations what do you think the
impact of the reaction of the Congress
to these secret stuff that was done
which caused executive orders limiting
military intelligence and so forth and
the fact that fewer and fewer of the
congressional members and the policy
Long's have had any of those types of
experience is going to have on anybody's
desire to conduct special operations in
the future well I think it's gonna make
it increasingly difficult I mean my
short answer would be that we're going
to see in spades what Helms told me
you're going to want to do what that
that I think is is the the end result of
it because what what influences of these
individuals is all of this sort of the
stories of things that went wrong and
and and of course important ethical
moral questions that we need to address
so my answer would be that that the
kinds of limitations and constraints
that SOG had placed on it are multiplied
by adding Congress to the to the mix of
things although I mean it doesn't
necessarily mean that there can't be
more thoughtful approach but I think it
goes back to what I tried to say too
and answering John Collins question and
that is we need to to have a much more
serious and and and thoughtful
discussion about what Special Operations
can and cannot do and and how much risk
you're willing to take and and whether
you're willing to to take risks and I
know for example I mean without sort of
telling a tale out of school I can
remember when I was at at Fort Bragg and
I was giving a briefing on my research
and and I was talking about you know the
the problem there's some of these
problems in the saw context and some of
the officers that were part of the
briefing said to me we had that set of
problems about a month ago when some
things we we aren't going to tell you
about but but that's a that's a
continuing issue for us
observations about the differences
between the era that you're talking
about
and after all Armed Services the control
Appropriations for the agency as well as
defense committees control
appropriations for DoD and the agency
has compared to the president here where
you have a different set of committees
and the impact of that on the ability to
conduct these kinds of things
well the Appropriations I think is is
one aspect of it the other aspect of it
is the finding process and and the
extent to which in the findings for
conducting covert operations and
especially in the last let's say 15 well
20 years where we've been so polarized
between the the Congress and the
presidency that um it it makes it
difficult I mean very difficult to do
these things in the oversight process
isn't just a budget I mean the budget
issue comes into play for sure and you
can see that in some of the the
operations of the 80s and I think
especially in the the Contras all
they're not of the afghan situation so
it's not that there are places where the
executive and the Congress can come
together to use secret operations but um
it's difficult and in the budget process
allows for for micromanagement and in
the case of them if we look at the
Contra example of real micromanagement
of what you can do and not do so um you
know our process and I'm a believer and
I mean I believe that the oversight
process is important and and and I think
that Congress can play a very important
role in in not just saying what's what's
wrong but also looking at this and and
in supporting measures where they can
contribute to achieving secured national
security objectives but I mean it's a
dogfight and you probably know that
better than I do
look at the transcripts of those 60
interviews or they yeah they're all Fort
Bragg I mean I put the whole collection
of Fort Bragg and and you can get them
there in the they're there yes both the
Soviets Koreans are discussing here in
its predecessor in the second world war
took place within the context of war and
that's someone coming interfere even
then they appear to be more interesting
than significant what is the implication
as you see that there is any relevance
to that experience the present situation
well I think there is relevance and I I
don't sucide on't think that we're going
to conduct a full-blown saw no but I do
think that many of the different
techniques and measures that SOG used
are measures that you may want in your
quiver in in the future for example
let's suppose one let's suppose that
that one of the things that you might
want to do against a rogue state is to
is to create some suspicion and
deception among the the inner circle
well SOG had a variety of techniques for
for trying to do that and today we may
even have more because of information
warfare and saga saga conducted
clandestine and covert sabotage
operations and there may be some place
for that so it's not I don't want to
propose that that in total we we would
have any I can't see anything on the
horizon where that would be the case but
but in terms of the different
instruments that saag employed those may
be instruments that in fact we ought to
give consideration and for to and so in
looking at how saag used those we can
learn from that what worked what didn't
constraints good bad and so on
does it come up in the book at all you
ever entertain the idea that in a
democracy with a constitution we haven't
bothered to clear Washington's 1941 that
there are hazards of democracy that
comes up before the conversation so far
so here talking to public saw type
operations in the atmosphere that we're
dealing with not Road States it was
lobby of gross State
what's the approval mechanism for these
types of songs I mean we have an
approval mechanism and it's called the
finding process and it goes from the
President to the Congress to the
committee's and in the committee's make
judgments about this so I mean I don't
see this is outside the democratic
process now I think we need to have in
the democratic process a discussion of
should we or shouldn't we and if we
should to what extent and not but when
it gets down to if let's suppose I on
that then we make the decision all right
we we need to be able to do some of this
in the shadows and that's a conclusion
that there's some kind of consensus on
we have to we have to look at it in in a
reasoned way but but often I mean the
debate over covert operations is not
reason it's it tends to be either under
no circumstances or yeah some some on
the other side who think that that there
should be no constraints we've got to be
more thoughtful in that exercise thank
you dick
before I ask you to join me in thanking
dick once more let me make two comments
one as I mentioned earlier the these
events a sort of extension of what goes
on in the pages of joint force quarterly
will be bringing out a review of this
book shortly in jfq and also through the
cooperation of
Collins dicks publisher will be taking a
chapter on military strategy and SOG and
producing it as a feature article in a
forthcoming issue of jfq and secondly I
want to announce that the next event in
this series will take place on Thursday
evening January 20th when the book on
parade will be Korea on the brink from
the 1212 incident to the Kwangju
uprising 1979-1980 by General John
Wickham former chief of staff of the
army and commander-in-chief United
Nations command and combined forces
command in Korea at the time of the
events after the assassination of
president Park that led to the tragedy
and in the suppression of demonstrations
in Guangzhou it's a case study and a
sink under fire in a bunker without much
communication with his ally and it's a
very fascinating study that book will be
published by nd you press here later
this month and be available to the
students and faculty probably to look at
before the event dick thanks very much
for coming down from from up north
tonight and safe trip back to Fletcher
and I urge those who have looked at the
book do because it's a it's a very
interesting highlight on the Vietnam War
which has been largely overlooked and as
I can attest from spending two years at
Fort Bragg during this period something
which I didn't even learn very much
about at the club after happy hour
thanks a lot
richard schultz teaches international
politics at tufts university and has
written several books including a future
of airpower and soviet union and
revolutionary warfare
HarperCollins publishes this book the
secret war